---
date: '2025-05-03T15:36:30-04:00'
draft: true
title: 'Immigration Post 1/2'
tags: ["immigration", "economics", "book review"]
---

This is the first of what I believe will be several posts reviewing chapters from the book I am currently reading, *Good Economics for Hard times* by Banerjee and Duflo (2019 Nobel laureates). The pair of economists explore hot-button issues such as immigration, trade, and climate change, presenting the economic literature's consensus on the topic and pointing out flaws in the layman's view (as well as flaws in the expert opinion). I will summarize their arguments, explore the data on my own, and respond to Banerjee and Duflo's exposition. This post will review Banerjee and Duflo's chapter on immigration, summarizing the main takeaways and then responding. Special attention will be paid to the recent surge in immigration in the United States. Through this evaluation, we will see if Banerjee and Duflo's arguments from 2019 hold true for our situation.

### In Banerjee and Duflo's Words
Banerjee and Duflo begin their discussion by explaining its relevance. Suprisingly, the authors note that immigration is not an especially pertinent topic due to some large increase in immigration but because of "recent alarmism" in the public that has been stoked by politicians worldwide. The percentage of international migrants globally in 2017 was roughly the same as it was in 1960 or 1990. However, the authors reference several surveys which show how citizens of a nation repeatedly overestimate the level of immigration their country is experiencing. Banerjee and Duflo argue the fears behind these overestimates and the arguments made by isolationist politicians are not supported by data nor economic theory. I will list my main takeaways from the chapter and briefly summarize them. 

1. **Not many migrate**
Banerjee and Duflo point out that given the economic benefits that moving location can generate, we would expect to see a lot more folks packing up and heading to a new location. Supporting this point, the authors note that the countries with the most emmigrants, such as Iraq, Syria, Guatemala, and even Yemen, are "far from being the poorest in the world." Accounting for differences in the cost of living, per capita income in Iraq is roughly twenty times that in Liberia and ten times as high as in Mozambique or Sierra Leone. The surge in immigration the United States has experienced (a phenomenon we explore later) has largely come from migrants crossing the US-Mexico border. Banerjee and Duflo (writing back in 2019) point out that Mexico is an upper-middle-income country with a "much praised and widely imitated welfare system." Even within a country, workers will generally not migrate for improved economic opportunities. Through a review of several studies, the authors conclude that immigrants and migrants can make real gains in their living standards by moving. However, they are reluctant to do so. After discussing the benefits accrued by displaced Icelanders who lost their homes in a volcanic eruption and by relocated Finlanders following WWII land partitions, Banerjee and Duflo write: "That it takes a disaster scenario or a war to motivate people to gravitate to a location with the highest wages shows economic incentives on their own are often not sufficient to get people to move." A study of rural workers in Bangladesh found that even when provided information about better job opportunities available in the cities during the "lean season" where rural work is harder to secure, workers still did not migrate. Even when offered a stipend to cover travel and a few days' expenses (conditional on the worker migrating) only 22 percent of households sent a worker into the city. Those workers earned substantially more than they would have if they had remained, sending back much-needed cash to their families who were able to consume 50 percent more calories, reaching a "comfortable level of food nutrition." However, during the next lean season, only about half of the migrants who recieved financial support migrated back to the city for better employment. Despite knowing the benefits well out-weighed the costs, people refused to move.

Taking the dysmal science at its face value, these relevations would shock an economist. Banerjee and Duflo summarize: "Given the size of the economic rewards, there are many fewer migrants than we would expect." Thankfully, the discipline has developed its model of human behavior beyond the rigid *homo economicus* -- a utility-maximizing robot that performs nearly-instantaneous analysis of costs and benefits. As the authors explain in their chapter, human psychology is the missing piece to this puzzle. Summarizing the arguments briefly: humans are loss-adverse, connection-dependent, and poor estimators of risk. These factors make migration unappealing to all besides the well-off, exceedingly desperate, or exceedingly determined. 

2. **Effect on native wages and unemployment**
To summarize the findings from the economic literature, Banerjee and Duflo quote the 2017 report on the impact of immigration from the US National Academy of Sciences, which gathers academic experts together to reach a consensus on various topics. The panel for the immigration study featured a range of opinions but was able to reach this conclusion: "Empirical research in recent decades suggests that findings remain by and large consistent with those in The New Americans National Research Council (1997) in that, when measured over a period of more than 10 years, the impact of immigration on the wages of natives overall is very small." This conclusion is not a slam-dunk for immigration advocates, but considering that it is the product of a varied group of economists attempting to reach a widely-accepted truth, it offers sizeable support for open immigration. Banerjee and Duflo explore several notable studies on the impact of immigration on wages, studies carefully designed to isolate immigration as a fully independent variable from wages (rather than a coincidental side-effect of wages rising in a particular location). Exploiting natural experiments created by random developments that unexpectedly increased immigration in certain cities/regions, these studies broadly find no negative impact of low-skilled immigration on native wages. Some studies found positive effects on native wages. A historical analysis of the European migration to the United States in the early 20th century found that European migrants "increased overall employment in the native population, made it more likely natives would become foremen or managers, and increased industrial production." In modern times, a study of immigration in Denmark in the late 1990s found that the low-skilled native Danish workers were able to change occupation and assume more complex roles that required more technical and communicative skill. 

The authors explain the economic theory that underlies the empirical evidence. Anti-immigration arguments suggest that immigrants boost the labor supply, meaning there are more workers competing for fewer jobs, permitting employers to shop around for the lowest demanded wages. This is an overly simplified supply-demand model. Immigrants spend money by buying groceries, going to restauraunts, purchasing clothes, and a myriad of other ways. This spending increases the demand for labor, pushing the supply and demand for labor to balance. Importantly, if the immigrants are not spending their earnings in their areas of work, native employment may suffer. This was true of Czech workers who were permitted to work in post-WWII Berlin but lived across the border, spending their wages in their native land. The second point Banerjee and Duflo make involves the mechanization of labor. A boost in the labor supply delays the adoption of automating technology by producers. When California kicked out Mexican immigrant farm workers (*braceros*) in 1964, rather than hire natives, farms invested in machinery and switched to less labor-intensive crops. Adoption of tomato-harvesting equipment in California went from 0 percent in 1964 to 100 percent in 1967. For comparison, Ohio, which had no *braceros*, experienced no change in its adoption of the technology during the same period. Furthermore, Banerjee and Duflo suggest low-skilled immigrant workers complement native workers by freeing them to pursue occupational upgrades (as seen in the studies earlier) or by permitting high-skill workers to enter the labor force as immigrant workers lower the price of certain services that allow skilled workers on the margin to seek employment. Banerjee and Duflo note that working these services (such as childcare) are not particularly desirable to low-skilled natives and, as immigrants fill these rolls, the declining price allows highly skilled workers (in this example, highly skilled women) to enter the job market. Finally, the authors suggest immigrants possess personality traits that make them a welcome addition to any economy. The determined, risk-taking spirit that is required to leave one's home makes for a great entrepreneur. In 2017, 43 percent of the 500 largest companies in the US (by revenue) were founded or co-founded by immigrants or the children of immigrants. 

More reasons for the immigrant's inconsequential effect on native wages and employment is found in evaluating the nature of the labor demand for low-skill workers. I will briefly summarize these points. First, employers have a strong preference for the known and a general reluctance to make layoffs, giving the established native worker a large advantage over the immmigrant. Second, firms must pay their workers enough so that the loss of the job is a sufficient threat to keep the worker productive. Economists call this the efficiency wage. The result is that firms cannot risk paying a newcomer too little, meaning immigrants are less able to undercut the native's prevailing wage. 

Banerjee and Duflo briefly overview high-skilled immigrants and reach a different conclusion. The skilled-worker labor market differs from the low-skilled labor market. Employers in this labor market are offering more attractive jobs and have less of a need to raise wages to retain workers. Additionally, there is more concern for an employee's skill set, rather than their personality or reliability. These two factors eliminate the advantages for natives that they posess in the low-skill labor market. Banerjee and Duflo cite a study that found that "for every skilled, qualified foreign nurse employed in a city, there are between one and two fewer native-born nurses." 

### In My Own Words 
I generally am in strong agreement with Banerjee and Duflo on this issue. However, I am curious if their arguments hold for the recent immigration surge in the United States. Certainly, we benefit from immigration. Additional workers drive economic growth, increasing the size of the pie so that all may benefit. As Banerjee and Duflo found, these foreign workers are more likely to complement, rather than compete with, the established native workers. There is not some fixed amount of labor that can only be spread to so many workers. Economic growth is a complex product comprised of simple inputs. The process for how these inputs combine to increase economic output is involved. However, at its base are the inputs of economic liberty, property rights, productivity, and a workforce. Immigration increases the size of the work force and Banerjee and Duflo show it makes established workers more productive by permitting occupational upgrades. Immigration is starting to sound like a free lunch! 

Praising immigration at this political moment seems rather tone-deaf. Two issues areas were key in Republicans gaining control of the White House and both chambers of Congress last November: inflation and immigration. Just recently, Republicans in the House of Representatives passed a megabill pushing President Trump's legislative priorities. The bill contained [nearly $150 billion](https://www.cbo.gov/publication/61420) in outlays to stregthen border security. These developments rose out of concern for *illegal* immigration. As thousands poured over the southern border, the Republican message was that these were undesirable criminals intent on stealing resources from American citizens. Notably, Banerjee and Duflo did not discuss illegal immigration. Does their categorization of an immigrant also apply to an illegal immigrant? Are illegal immigrants also especially determined and resourceful individuals who grow the labor force and drive economic growth for a nation? Or are illegal immigrants a different type of immigrant: a lazy individual looking for government benefits or a prospecting criminal searching for new markets? These two views sum the Republican messaging on illegal immigrants. The reforms made to government benefits included in the megabill were in part justified by preventing illegal immigrants from recieving government handouts. There are certainly cases that support these views but is it a fair characterization of the illegal immigrant and immigrants more broadly? Banerjee and Duflo's framework suggests this view is faulty. We know that migrating is a loathsome task that few undertake, even when aware of the payoffs. The economists suggest that, generally, three types of people emmigrate: the rich, those fleeing for their lives, and the especially determined. People don't migrate on the hope of social benefits or to commit more crime. This framework holds conceptually. According to Banerjee and Duflo, Mexico posesses an admirable welfare system. The United States posesses a much more robust judicial process than found in the countries these immigrants are coming from. Why would a lazy immigrant searching for social benefits pass through Mexico into the United States? Even if our handouts are generous and lack sufficient scrutinty of elegibility, is a prospective immigrant really aware of this weakness? And would they be willing to undergo the dangerous trek across the border on the hope of these benefits? I am skeptical. Regarding the criminal, I am similarily skeptical a criminal operating in Central America would view the USA as a prime location for lawlessness. Our strong judicial system puts a lot of people in prison. The [1.8 million prisoners](https://www.prisonstudies.org/country/united-states-america) in America account for somewhere near a fifth of all prisoners world-wide while our population of 340 million comprises only four percent of the global population. The theory behind immigration does not support these depictions of lazy and lawless immigrants. However, we still must explore the data. 

Before approaching analysis of recent immigration trends in the United States, I will evaluate where I think Banerjee and Duflo's view could explain the surge. First, maybe the thousands bypassing the southern border *are* fleeing "the mouth of the shark." If conditions in the originating countries have deteriorated to such a point to where there is no chance of survival or normalcy, then Banerjee and Duflo would suggest an increase in migration. Second, perhaps the sustained immigration of Hispanics into the United States over the past decades has eroded certain important barriers for would-be migrants. A prospective immigrant is more likely to have existing connections in the United States. These connections can lower the vast amounts of uncertainty involved in immigration, reducing the posibility of loss and giving some assurance of social capital. Finally, would a large surge in immigration over a short time period worsen employment for natives? While Banerjee and Duflo's review of the literature asserts that immigrants have no effect on native employment, if the increase in the labor force is sudden and large, could that create a more painful shock? The economists argue that these immigrants will increase labor demand as they spend their wages. However, there must be a lag between these two shifts (the increase in labor supply and the increase in the labor demand) as immigrants would need to secure a job to spend their earnings. Under an influx of new workers, this lag might be especially disruptive. The labor supply and labor demand would eventually reach balance but the interim period could set back native employment significantly, if briefly. 

### In the Data's (and a few experts') Own Words 
Does the data around the surge in immigration support Banerjee and Duflo's view? Or are Republican messaging points more on target in this case? What are economists saying? Let's explore!

#### The Situation
I have mentioned a "recent surge in immigration" in the US several times but haven't explained what I am vaguely referencing. In their chapter, Banerjee and Duflo argue that despite the public's heightened concern over immigrant hordes, the share of immigrants globally is roughly unchanged from its level in the 20th century. This is not true of the United States.  

#### Expert Views

#### My look at wages in these immigration hotspots 

### Conclusion





